---
ID: 1887
post_title: 'The future of activism: flashmobs, gaming and global swarms'
author: lilian
post_date: 2014-08-23 08:46:55
post_excerpt: ""
layout: post
permalink: >
  http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/the-future-of-activism-flashmobs-gaming-and-global-swarms/
published: true
embed_code:
  - ""
---
As mentionned previously, Occupy Founder Micah White ([@BeingMicahWhite][1]) believes "[mutual aid flashmob][2]", self-organized citizen gathering could be used for creative and productive action like start a time bank, plant urban gardens, fix local roads, organize free healthcare clinics, and build tiny houses for the homeless... In a new article on the [tactical history of activism][3], he digs more in this direction and add some interesting thoughts on the power of self-organized flashmobs: 
> Perhaps the most exciting direction for activism is the increasing politicization of flashmobs. First capturing the public imagination in 2003, flashmobs are the sudden appearance of dozens, sometimes hundreds, of individuals who carry out a synchronized action that ranges from the absurd to the disobedient. In recent years, flashmobs have been used to organize spontaneous pillow fights, eerie frozen moments, rush-hour parties and macabre zombie walks. Now, they are becoming an outlet for social discontent. In Philadelphia, for example, unruly youth have exploited cell phones to organize flashmob swarms that appear without warning, looting stores and leaving police mystified. Fun, easy to organize, and resistant to both infiltration and preemption because of their friend-to-friend network topology, flashmobs are positioned to be the next popular tactic with revolutionary potential.So far, the tactical significance of flashmobs has been limited by their local scale. They typically happen in a single city, on a single day and at a single time. If the magic of Seattle was due to the innovative transposition of anti-logging barricades to an urban environment, the power of the second generation of flashmobs will lie in the upgrade of a local happening into a global phenomenon. Imagine activism globalized: synchronized intercontinental crowds that flare up spontaneously at noon – to throw rancid butter at each of the 737 US overseas military bases, to blackspot each of the 32,000 McDonald’s golden arches or to block the entrance of each of the 8,500 Walmart stores. In addition to this, Micah sees **gaming** as another ingredient that could revolutionnize activism. Fun/gaming is actually one of the characteristics of the [new breed of co-creative events][4]. 
> A similarly promising direction lies with integrating the principles of gaming into activism. Initial steps in this direction have been made by “alternate reality game” designers, such as Jane McGonigal and Elan Lee, whose work re-enchants everyday life by layering a fictional universe atop reality. Think of the 1997 film *The Game*. One notable example is SFZero, a San Francisco-based game in which players earn points by interacting with the city in impish ways. Missions include “find roof access,” “add a colorful bulb to a public socket” and “steal something from a wild animal.” For culture jammers, the essential big idea is that activism can come alive if the key components of what makes games immersive – heroic narrative, the quest for experience, increasing levels of difficulty, social engagement, adventure, etc. – are applied to sparking a revolution. The tactical potential is limited only by our imagination. Companies like Twilio, also in San Francisco, allow anyone to build scriptable, automated phone numbers that can receive and make calls, send text messages and pull information from databases to play personalized messages. Combine this with a rousing storyline, clues left in public spaces and a series of missions that take players up the ladder-of-engagement from inexperienced activist to master culture jammer, and there is no limit to the kinds of “games” revolutionaries can play. One example would be a game where participants use their phones to interact with fictional characters and, in order to unravel an anticorporate storyline or solve an anticonsumerist mystery, earn blackspot points by putting up Buy Nothing Day posters, throwing stink bombs, recruiting comrades and organizing flashmobs. When activism is “gamified,” reaching level 50 could start an insurrection. Micah points out we are at the beginning of a new era. No one can predict what tactics will be successful but he mentions various example of distributed actions: 
> Some may dedicate themselves to WikiLeaks-style initiatives, others may develop a P2P flashmob application or a culture jammer game, while still others may discover previously unseen leverage points by which to challenge capitalism.   Micah's ideas are not far fetched. We already see global gatherings giving birth to temporary global communities of practices, flashmob uniting adhoc groups locally. Most of these events already have gaming elements in them and new events could be designed to be even more gamified. A P2P flashmob application is likely to be built by someone soon: Imagine an Avaaz-like application but where instead of clicktivism" & signing *against* something, people can sign up to join a co-creative gathering *for* something. [Disco Soup][5] is a perfect example of this new kind of activism: organizing a Disco soup is a great way to to raise awareness about food waste, as it unites people around a positive action and in a fun manner. Disco soup is a recent event and the community of practice still small, but Looking further in the future a "global disco soup day" could synchronize and unite local groups fighting against food waste into a disco soup swarm with global visibility and impact. Read Micah's full article: [To the barricades! A Tactical History of Activism][3]      

 [1]: https://twitter.com/BeingMicahWhite
 [2]: http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/towards-mutual-aid-flashmobs/
 [3]: http://www.micahmwhite.com/social-change-theory/to-the-barricades
 [4]: http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/a-new-breed-of-co-creative-gathering/ "A new breed of co-creative gatherings"
 [5]: http://www.co-creative-recipes.cc/recipes/disco-soupe/ "Disco soupe"